Stodden_2018

The Data Science Life Cycle: A Disciplined Approach to Advancing Data Science as a Science

by Victoria Stodden

Communications Of The Acm | July 2020 | Vol. 63 | No. 7
DOI:10.1145/3360646

THE EDUCATION AND research enterprise is leveraging opportunities to accelerate science and discovery offered by computational and data-enabled technologies, often broadly referred to as data science. Ten years ago, we wrote that an “accurate image [of a scientific researcher] depicts a computer jockey working at all hours to launch experiments on computer servers."

Since then, the use of data and computation has exploded in academic and industry research, and interest in data science is widespread in universities and institutions. Two key questions emerge for the research enterprise: How to train the next generation of researchers and scientists in the deeply computational and data-driven research methods and processes they will need and use? and How to support the use of these methods and processes to advance research and discovery across disparate disciplines and, in turn, define data science as a scientific discipline in its own right? An identifiable discipline of data science would encourage and reward research that fosters the continued development of computational and data-enabled methods and their successful integration into research and dissemination pipelines, as well as accelerating the generation of reliable knowledge from data science.

This article offers an intellectual framing to address these two key questions—called the Data Science Life Cycle—intended to aide decision makers in institutions, policy makers and funding agency leadership, as well as data science researchers and curriculum developers.

The Data Science Life Cycle introduced here can be used as a framing principle to guide decision making in a variety of educational settings, pointing the way on topics such as: whether to develop new data science courses (and which ones) or rely on existing course offerings or a mix of both; whether to design data science curricula across existing degree granting units or work within them; how to relate new degrees and  programmatic initiatives to ongoing research in data science and encourage the development of a recognized research area in data science itself; and how to prioritize support for data science research across a variety of disciplinary domains. These can be difficult questions from an implementation point of view since university governance structures typically separate disciplines into effective siloes, with self-contained evaluation, degree-granting, and decisionmaking authority. Data science presents as a cross cutting methodological effort with the needs of a full-fledged science including: communities for idea sharing, review, and assessment; standards for reproducibility and replicability; journals and/or conferences; vehicles for disciplinary leadership and advancement; an understanding of its scope; and, broadly agreed-upon core curricula and subjects for training the next generation of researchers and educators.

After motivating the key data science challenges of interdisciplinarity and scope, this article presents the Data Science Life Cycle as a tool to enable the development of data science as a rigorous scientific discipline flexible enough to capitalize on unique institutional strengths and adapt to the needs of different research domains. Examples are given in curriculum development and steps to defining data science as a science.

Current Approaches to Data Science

There are currently four main approaches taken toward data science atpost-secondary institutions and universities in the U.S., with some institutions opting to take more than one approach. The first model involves issuing data science degrees from an existing department or school, such as the computer science department (for example, University of Southern California, Carnegie Mellon University, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), the statistics department (for example, Stanford University), a professional studies or extension school (Northwestern University, Harvard University), engineering (Johns Hopkins University), or the School of Information (UC Berkeley). This approach can include innovative steps such as online course offerings or collaborative degrees that approximate data science. An example of the latter is the undergraduate CS+X degree pioneered by the computer science department at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, where CS refers to computer science and X refers to a domain specific discipline such as economics, anthropology, or linguistics. For a CS+X degree students receive a degree in discipline X with half their courses comprising a common core of computer science classes and half their courses from their disciplinary area X. Stanford University has a CS+X program for undergraduates designed as a joint major between computer science and the humanities. Data science itself has not been established as a sub-discipline in computer science or any other discipline to the best of my knowledge, nor is there an ACM Special Interest Group on Data Science.

The second approach to data science extends or transforms an existing department to explicitly include a home for all of data science, not just the data science degree programs. For example, the statistics department may be renamed Statistics and Data Science (for example, Yale University) or a School of Information Science or Informatics renamed to include the Data Science moniker (Drexel University). The third approach is to create a coordinating mechanism such as a Data Science institute or center at the university (Columbia University, University of Virginia, University of Delaware, University of Chicago, UC Berkeley). Such an institute tends not to have faculty lines, but affiliates faculty who have an appointment elsewhere on campus. It may grant certificates and/or degrees in coordination with affiliated faculty and units, and often began with a focus on professionals and executive education. The University of Washington, for example, extended an existing institute on campus, the eScience Institute, to house its cross-disciplinary Data Science initiative. The final approach is to bring the institute’s major data science disciplinary units (for example, statistics, computer science and engineering, information science) together under one organizational umbrella to determine degree programs, grant degrees, and house faculty lines and data science research. This is the most recent approach, currently undertaken for example at UC Berkeley (to my knowledge Berkeley is also the only institution to explicitly articulate a Data Science Life Cycle when describing one of its data science degrees).

In some institutions, the trappings of data science have emerged organically within departments themselves without the data science label. For example, offering more classes in statistics and computational methods, orcreating data facilities to manage the increasing volumes of data used in departmental research such as the Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS) in the Department of Psychology at Stanford University or the Data Analytics and Biostatistics Core in the Emory University School of Medicine. Established domain specific data repositories such as the Protein Data Bank can be central to established research and have long histories of knowledge and expertise development. As data science progresses, we would be remiss not to take the broad advances made by these efforts into account.

It is clear the potential of data science has captured the imagination of students and the broader society.18 In my experience, however, students can perceive a gap in our pedagogical offerings when it comes to supporting their interest in data science. For a student seeking to do advanced coursework in data science it can appear that statistics is not computational enough, computer science isn’t data inference focused enough, information science is too broad, and the domain sciences do not provide a sufficiently deep pedagogical agenda in data science. The research context today is markedly different to even a decade ago in the use of computational and data-enabled methods in a wide range of long-established disciplines from biology (bioinformatics23) to physics (computational physics22) to mathematics (computer-enabled mathematical proofs12) to English (quantitative analyses of literary texts13) to sociology (digital social science17), and students are asking the right questions about where data science fits in their education. Not only has it increased the types, scales, and sources of data-accelerated discovery,25 data has opened new vistas of scientific investigation, methodological advances, and innovation through the creation of novel comprehensive datasets available to communities.5,16 Data science is inherently interdisciplinary, yet must have a coherent scope in order to develop as a discipline.

Defining Data Science as a Discipline: The Challenges of Interdisciplinarity and Scope

In what institutional unit or entity should a data science program reside, and what subject matter is considered within the scope of data science? These questions belie the two principal challenges to the advancement of data science as a discipline: its inherently interdisciplinary nature, and the lack of a well-defined scope.

